wip (#93)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0093-rfc-categories.md

---
feature: rfc_categories
start-date: 2021-05-19
author: David Arnold
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: @kevnicox, @Mic92, @gytis-ivaskevicius
shepherd-leader: @kevincox
related-issues:
category: process
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> The RFC process is amended with means to categorize RFCs into one of: _feature_, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RFC process is amended to categorize RFCs into one of: _feature_, 
```

Nit: Simplify.

> _information_ or _process_, where each category sets different accents that
> improve the overall outcome of the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_information_ or _process_, where each category sets different expectations for reviewers that
improve the overall outcome of the process.
```

I'm not familiar with the use of "accents" in that context.

Additionally I feel that adding "for reviewers" emphasizes that this isn't intended to change the meaning of the final outcome or change things for authors but to help guide the review.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## Some issues are not addressed by the community

> There is no appropriate venue for it. When reading the current RFC process, it becomes

Reviewer: What is "it"?

> clear that it was made primarily with purely technical decisions in mind. It might only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clear that it was made primarily for technical decisions. It might only
```

Nit: Simplify.

be a perception, but this perception systemically skews what's being discussed and what

> not.

Reviewer 2: But then why are there existing RFCs which you have yourself marked as `informational` or `process`? This seems to contradict your point.

Author: I think it is the best exemplification of the need for this RFC, indeed.

It seems so necesary that people even disregarded the skewed conductive formulation of the current RFC material.

On the other hand, not everyone might feel entitled to this "disregard".

Hence, this RFC intended to empower authors of  RFCs that are non-feature in order to help scale the governance process.

As a result, important topics might not be adressed and settled by the community at large

> in a generally accepted procedure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
via a generally accepted procedure.
```

Reviewer: I might take a different approach and say:

> As a result it is difficult to raise many important topics for discussion since the RFC process often leads reviewers to view the topic in the wrong light.

Specifically, it is hard to propose a well coordinated experiment across the community,
document and acknowledge design issues, record proof-generated insight, but also to
amend the RFC process itself, the forum rules, the code of conduct or propose any other 

> binding changes to community workflows or infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: But actually, the RFC process has been changed without requiring categories, see e.g [RFC36](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0036-rfc-process-team-amendment.md).

Author: I was briefly considering to replace the word "hard" with "unintuitive". But, then I figured they are just two nuances to convey the same meaning (=an obstacle).Maybe I should use "unintuitive"?

Reviewer: I think this is the key. The fact that previous attempts have succeeded does not mean that the process is good. it just means that

1. There is sufficient desire.
2. The process is not literally impossible.

I agree that it is hard to find a quantitative number but the best we can do is look at examples where we feel that the process could have gone better for past RFCs whether or not the RFC was eventually accepted. And this approach still ignores RFCs that were never even submitted because the author couldn't fit their idea into the template.

I don't think "unintuitive" is the best word because in my mind the change here is intended to guide the review. Whereas "unintuitive" sounds like an author problem to me.

**For example**, the [flake RFC](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49), which by many is
considered a failed RFC process, might have benefited from a framework to transition into

> a general experiment in the form of an _informational_ RFC as soon as it had become

Reviewer 2: If flakes would've been an informational RFC, then I think the word informational is a misnomer.

Author: It might be. I'd be happy to hear suggestions.

A better name for something that does not primarily originate in a change.

Let's keep in mind that everything can be technically interpreted as change, but contrasting with the other two categories, this category attempts to create a "space for RFC-style consensus" that does not _primarily_ originate in a change.

Reviewer: I think the flake RFC had similar problems, but maybe wouldn't be solved exactly by this proposal.

I think it *was* a problem that we couldn't merge an RFC with the intent to experiment. This is an example of an issue specifying the desired outcome. It is very common for people to focus on "I want to make X easier" without saying the "implied" bit of "I want to **make a technical change** to Nix that makes X easier". For example maybe if we could add "I want to **add an experimental feature to nix** to make X easier. This could have guided reviewers that not every technical detail needs to be perfect and production read, as another RFC would be required to actually implement the stable feature once we have a lot more background. This could have helped the RFC be accepted with the right goals.

This sounds similar to this RFC where categories are a way of suggesting the desired outcome. _feature_ implies that you want to make a change to Nix, Nixpkgs or whatever and _informational_ means that you just want to get the community to agree on a fact or opinion with no other change. However the difference here is that flakes are not _informational_. The intention is to make a change to Nix, but maybe it would have helped to make a *not officially supported* change which is the key difference missing from the objective.

I do see a couple of ways to handle this:
- Recommend that some or all technical features have an experiment first. (A two-step process by default). 
- Add an experimental category to help direct the review.

However I don't see this RFC doing either. So I think the example needs to be changed to not be putting the flakes RFC into a category in which it doesn't appear to fit. Either we need to find a category for it that would be expected to help the review process or we need to find a better example.

clear that it won't be accepted as a _feature_ RFC. Its subsequent closure has rendered

> the entire flake experiment to a largely undocumented, unstructured, and intransparent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the entire flake experiment to a largely undocumented, unstructured, and opaque
```

process that still elicites strong opinions within the community. Clarity over RFC options

> and venues _might_ have helped mitigate this situation.

Reviewer 2: Can you explain better how having categories would've helped in the case of flakes?

Author: Categories act like a conceptual map, as a traditional map, they help navigate the process. I can't tell if it _wpuld_ have helped, but navigating with a (better) map seems indeed capable of improving the outcome (of navigation).

## Some issues are not addressed from the appropriate angle

Even if, in the past, people might have used the RFC Process to gather broader consensus
around some of those hard-to-propose topics, the ensuing discussion still might have been
framed in a way that is not best suited. This actually starts with the structure of the
template.

By explicitly categorizing RFCs, it will be immediatly evident for participants that
those RFCs are a) legitimate and b) require an evaluation within the fair boundaries
of their categories.

**For example**, [RFC31](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/31), a feature RFC, then was
closed and superseded by [RFC46](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/46), which ended up 
being an informational RFC with certain inclination towards a process RFC, that was accepted.
RFC46 is a prime example of the usefulness of "documenting language", as the RFC relates to
its purpose. Having an explicit categorization is expected to suggest making use of these

> venues to a broder RFC author base.

Reviewer: Since this was ultimately successful maybe it is worth explicitly claiming that the presence of categories upfront may have led this RFC in the right direction from the start.

- Process RFCs
  - Change the RFC process, the organization of the issue tracker or the support forum
  - Changes to community workflows or other community infrastructure
  - Amend the Code of Conduct        
- Feature RFCs
  - Anything that is currently covered by the RFC process and does not better fit into
    any of the other two categories.

Authors are advised to choose the most prevalent category for their classification. For
example, if an informational RFC requires some changes to the community infrastructure,
but still mainly proposes an experiment, it would go into the "informationl" category.

This RFC is accompanied by commits that implement it. Please refer to them for the detailed
design.

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

The relevant examples and interactions are exposed in the motivation section.
The detailed design does not require further exemplification, since it is intended to be
an authors personal best judgment that drives the categorization, not a specific set of criteria.
I don't think its feasible to develop such fixed set of criteria herein in a meaningful way.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> No substantial drawback comes to my mind, that would not be an alibi for this section.

Reviewer: It seems worth noting the minor drawbacks for completeness:

- Additional choice for RFC authors to make when submitting an RFC.
- Multiple templates need to be maintained.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

No alternative comes to my mind, that would not be an alibi for this section.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

At the point of initiating this RFC, the detailed changes to the template are not yet known.

> They will be complemented at any suitable point before reaching FCP.

Reviewer: Do we consider ourselves there yet? It seems like concrete changes to the templates have been proposed.

# Future work

> [future]: #future-work

Reviewer: Future work is probably also to reevaluate the categories.

1. Are there categories that are unused?
2. Are there categories which are discussed in a very similar manor and are suitable for merging.
3. Are there categories which have different types of discussion evolving which may be better handled by splitting the category into multiple.

This may include collapsing back into one category if this RFC doesn't seem to help the discussions.
